ertgateway/README.adoc, before:

= ertgateway

`ertgateway` is responsible for receiving telemetry data messages and images transmitted by `ertnode` and
for providing network APIs and a user interface (with `ertgateway-ui-web`) to view the received data. The device
running `ertgateway` can be used as a fixed base station or, in the case of tracking high-altitude balloons,
as a mobile station in a chase car.

== Features

The received telemetry data messages are stored in JSON format to local log files, identically to `ertnode`, and
all received images are also stored on local disk. In addition to collecting telemetry data from the node,
`ertgateway` runs a telemetry data collector thread similar to `ertnode`: it logs the gateway location
(if GPS is installed), data transfer statistics and system information to separate log files. The latest telemetry data
message received from the node is also stored with each gateway log message
to make correlation easy for data analysis later.

To aid mobile use of the gateway device, most useful details of the telemetry can be displayed on
a ST7036-compatible SPI-bus-based LCD-screen. The screen driver code is mainly aimed to be used with
the link:https://www.modmypi.com/raspberry-pi/breakout-boards/pimoroni/pimoroni-display-o-tron-hat[Display-O-Tron HAT]
where the buttons control the data displayed on the screen and the signal level is represented in the LED array.
If there is only a bare ST7036-compatible screen (without additional buttons) connected to the SPI bus, `ertgateway`
can be configured to cycle through all available data automatically.

== Hardware requirements

The minimum hardware requirements for running `ertgateway` are:

* A Raspberry Pi model A+, B+, Zero, 2B or 3B (any model with 40-pin GPIO connector)
** Other single-board computers can be used by implementing support for accessing GPIO pins and
   registering GPIO interrupts.
* A Semtech SX127x / HopeRF RFM9xW LoRa transceiver connected to Raspberry Pi SPI port.
** Additionally LoRa chip DIO0 and DIO5 interrupts need to be exposed through Raspberry Pi GPIO pins.
** For example: link:https://store.uputronics.com/index.php?route=product/product&path=61&product_id=68[Raspberry Pi+ LoRa(TM) Expansion Board]  from Uputronics
* *Optional:* A GPS receiver supported by `gpsd` -- any receiver outputting NMEA format data through serial port should work.
** Tracking of gateway location and the distance between the node and the gateway will naturally work only if using a GPS receiver
** For exmaple: link:https://www.modmypi.com/raspberry-pi/breakout-boards/hab-supplies/raspberry-pi-gps-hat/[Raspberry Pi GPS HAT] from ModMyPi

== Installation

=== Installing dependencies

Install library dependencies:

[source,bash]
----
apt-get install ntp gpsd libgps21 libgps-dev libyaml-0-2 libyaml-dev
----

=== Configuring Raspberry Pi

Enable peripheral interfaces in Raspberry Pi by adding the following to `/boot/config.txt`:

[source]
----
# Enable I2C
dtparam=i2c_arm=on

# Enable SPI
dtparam=spi=on

# Enable serial port UART for GPS (only if GPS is used)
enable_uart=1

# Enable use of PPS time signal through GPIO (if exposed by GPS receiver)
dtoverlay=pps-gpio,gpiopin=4
----

=== Configuring GPSd and NTP (optional: only if GPS is installed)

Configure GPSd to use Raspberry Pi internal serial port (assuming GPS is connected to it).
*Replace the contents* of file `/etc/default/gpsd` with the following configuration:

[source]
----
# Default settings for the gpsd init script and the hotplug wrapper.

# Start the gpsd daemon automatically at boot time
START_DAEMON="true"

# Use USB hotplugging to add new USB devices automatically to the daemon
USBAUTO="true"

# Devices gpsd should collect to at boot time.
# They need to be read/writeable, either by user gpsd or the group dialout.
DEVICES="/dev/ttyAMA0"

# Other options you want to pass to gpsd
GPSD_OPTIONS="-n"
----

The time data and signals from a GPS receiver can be used to feed the NTP daemon,
so that Raspberry Pi can keep correct time as long as it has GPS lock.

Some GPS receivers expose PPS signal, which can be fed to Raspberry Pi GPIO for extra accuracy.
There is more information about using PPS signal on link:http://www.satsignal.eu/ntp/Raspberry-Pi-NTP.html[these]
link:https://github.com/flok99/rpi_gpio_ntpd[sites].
To use the PPS signal, an additional utility needs to be installed:

[source,bash]
----
git clone https://github.com/flok99/rpi_gpio_ntpd.git
cd rpi_gpio_ntpd
make
sudo make install
----

Run the utility at boot time by adding the following to `/etc/rc.local`:

[source,bash]
----
# Use GPIO18 (pin 12) for GPS PPS signal
/usr/local/bin/rpi_gpio_ntp -N 1 -g 18
----

Add the following configuration to `/etc/ntp.conf`:

[source]
----
# GPS Serial data reference
server 127.127.28.0 minpoll 4 maxpoll 4
fudge 127.127.28.0 time1 0.0 refid GPS

# GPS PPS reference
server 127.127.28.1 minpoll 4 maxpoll 4 prefer
fudge 127.127.28.1 refid PPS
{{< /sourcecode >}}
----

Enable GPSd and NTP daemon by executing:

[source,bash]
----
systemctl enable gpsd
systemctl start gpsd

systemctl enable ntp
systemctl start ntp
----

Reboot Raspberry Pi to make all config changes take effect.

=== Building `ertgateway`

Check out source code and build it:

[source,bash]
----
git clone https://github.com/mikaelnousiainen/ert.git
mkdir -p build/ertgateway
cd build/ertgateway
cmake ../../ert/ertgateway
make
----

=== Configuring `ertgateway`

Configure the application by editing `ertgateway.yaml` in the `build/ertnode` directory.

=== Running `ertgateway`

Run `ertgateway`: (uses `sudo` with root privileges, which are needed for GPIO access)
[source,bash]
----
./ertgateway-start-dev.sh # Run on foreground

./ertgateway-start.sh # Run as a background daemon
----

=== Installing the user interface `ertgateway-ui-web`

`ertgateway-ui-web` is a web-based user interfaces that provides access to the telemetry data messages and images
received and collected by `ertgateway`. The user interface source code is in another repository and it has to be built
and installed separately from the rest of the application.

See link:https://github.com/mikaelnousiainen/ertgateway-ui-web/[ertgateway-ui-web source code in GitHub].

Commit message:

Update WiringPi to latest upstream master. Improve installation docs.

ertgateway/README.adoc, after:

= ertgateway

`ertgateway` is responsible for receiving telemetry data messages and images transmitted by `ertnode` and
for providing network APIs and a user interface (with `ertgateway-ui-web`) to view the received data. The device
running `ertgateway` can be used as a fixed base station or, in the case of tracking high-altitude balloons,
as a mobile station in a chase car.

== Features

The received telemetry data messages are stored in JSON format to local log files, identically to `ertnode`, and
all received images are also stored on local disk. In addition to collecting telemetry data from the node,
`ertgateway` runs a telemetry data collector thread similar to `ertnode`: it logs the gateway location
(if GPS is installed), data transfer statistics and system information to separate log files. The latest telemetry data
message received from the node is also stored with each gateway log message
to make correlation easy for data analysis later.

To aid mobile use of the gateway device, most useful details of the telemetry can be displayed on
a ST7036-compatible SPI-bus-based LCD-screen. The screen driver code is mainly aimed to be used with
the link:https://www.modmypi.com/raspberry-pi/breakout-boards/pimoroni/pimoroni-display-o-tron-hat[Display-O-Tron HAT]
where the buttons control the data displayed on the screen and the signal level is represented in the LED array.
If there is only a bare ST7036-compatible screen (without additional buttons) connected to the SPI bus, `ertgateway`
can be configured to cycle through all available data automatically.

== Hardware requirements

The minimum hardware requirements for running `ertgateway` are:

* A Raspberry Pi model A+, B+, Zero, 2B, 3B, 3B+ or 4B (any model with the 40-pin GPIO connector)
** Other single-board computers can be used by implementing support for accessing GPIO pins and
   registering GPIO interrupts.
* A Semtech SX127x / HopeRF RFM9xW LoRa transceiver connected to Raspberry Pi SPI port.
** Additionally LoRa chip DIO0 and DIO5 interrupts need to be exposed through Raspberry Pi GPIO pins.
** For example: link:https://store.uputronics.com/index.php?route=product/product&path=61&product_id=68[Raspberry Pi+ LoRa(TM) Expansion Board]  from Uputronics
* *Optional:* A GPS receiver supported by `gpsd` -- any receiver outputting NMEA format data through serial port should work.
** Tracking of gateway location and the distance between the node and the gateway will naturally work only if using a GPS receiver
** For exmaple: link:https://www.modmypi.com/raspberry-pi/breakout-boards/hab-supplies/raspberry-pi-gps-hat/[Raspberry Pi GPS HAT] from ModMyPi

== Installation

The installation instructions assume use of Raspberry Pi OS (formerly Raspbian).
The current codebase has been tested on Raspberry Pi OS version 10.8, which is based on Debian 10.8 released
on February 6th, 2021.

=== Installing dependencies

Install library dependencies:

[source,bash]
----
apt-get install build-essential git cmake ntp gpsd libgps23 libgps-dev libyaml-0-2 libyaml-dev wiringpi
----

=== Configuring Raspberry Pi

Enable peripheral interfaces in Raspberry Pi by adding the following to `/boot/config.txt`:

[source]
----
# Enable I2C
dtparam=i2c_arm=on

# Enable SPI
dtparam=spi=on

# Enable SPI1 1CS (for the SPI1 bus)
dtoverlay=spi1-1cs

# Enable serial port UART for GPS (only if GPS is used)
enable_uart=1

# Enable use of PPS time signal through GPIO (if exposed by GPS receiver)
dtoverlay=pps-gpio,gpiopin=4
----

=== Configuring GPSd and NTP (optional: only if GPS is installed)

Configure GPSd to use Raspberry Pi internal serial port (assuming GPS is connected to it).
*Replace the contents* of file `/etc/default/gpsd` with the following configuration:

[source]
----
# Default settings for the gpsd init script and the hotplug wrapper.

# Start the gpsd daemon automatically at boot time
START_DAEMON="true"

# Use USB hotplugging to add new USB devices automatically to the daemon
USBAUTO="true"

# Devices gpsd should collect to at boot time.
# They need to be read/writeable, either by user gpsd or the group dialout.
DEVICES="/dev/ttyAMA0"

# Other options you want to pass to gpsd
GPSD_OPTIONS="-n"
----

The time data and signals from a GPS receiver can be used to feed the NTP daemon,
so that Raspberry Pi can keep correct time as long as it has GPS lock.

Some GPS receivers expose PPS signal, which can be fed to Raspberry Pi GPIO for extra accuracy.
There is more information about using PPS signal on link:http://www.satsignal.eu/ntp/Raspberry-Pi-NTP.html[these]
link:https://github.com/flok99/rpi_gpio_ntpd[sites].
To use the PPS signal, an additional utility needs to be installed:

[source,bash]
----
git clone https://github.com/flok99/rpi_gpio_ntpd.git
cd rpi_gpio_ntpd
make
sudo make install
----

Run the utility at boot time by adding the following to `/etc/rc.local`:

[source,bash]
----
# Use GPIO18 (pin 12) for GPS PPS signal
/usr/local/bin/rpi_gpio_ntp -N 1 -g 18
----

Add the following configuration to `/etc/ntp.conf`:

[source]
----
# GPS Serial data reference
server 127.127.28.0 minpoll 4 maxpoll 4
fudge 127.127.28.0 time1 0.0 refid GPS

# GPS PPS reference
server 127.127.28.1 minpoll 4 maxpoll 4 prefer
fudge 127.127.28.1 refid PPS
----

Enable GPSd and NTP daemon by executing:

[source,bash]
----
systemctl enable gpsd
systemctl start gpsd

systemctl enable ntp
systemctl start ntp
----

Reboot Raspberry Pi to make all config changes take effect.

=== Building `ertgateway`

Check out source code and build it:

[source,bash]
----
git clone https://github.com/mikaelnousiainen/ert.git
cd ert
git submodule update --init --recursive
cd ..
mkdir -p build/ertgateway
cd build/ertgateway
cmake ../../ert/ertgateway
make
----

=== Configuring `ertgateway`

Configure the application by editing `ertgateway.yaml` in the `build/ertgateway` directory.

=== Running `ertgateway`

Run `ertgateway`: (uses `sudo` with root privileges, which are needed for GPIO access)
[source,bash]
----
./ertgateway-start-dev.sh # Run on foreground

./ertgateway-start.sh # Run as a background daemon
----

=== Installing the user interface `ertgateway-ui-web`

`ertgateway-ui-web` is a web-based user interfaces that provides access to the telemetry data messages and images
received and collected by `ertgateway`. The user interface source code is in another repository and it has to be built
and installed separately from the rest of the application.

See link:https://github.com/mikaelnousiainen/ertgateway-ui-web/[ertgateway-ui-web source code in GitHub].
